# Rosetta stability pipeline

Rosetta stability pipeline is part of the PRISM reseach project. This pipeline aims to calculate ddG value from structure, by systematically mutating individual residues.

## Description
The stability pipeline uses as input a structure file (in PDB format), performs a relaxation, followed by a ∆∆G calculation by extracting the energy change upon (single point) mutation (∆∆Gmut - ∆∆Gwt). Therefore, the Rosetta software is used. The pipeline for soluble proteins follows the classical cartesian protocol by 
Hahnbeom Park, Philip Bradley, Per Greisen Jr., Yuan Liu, Vikram Khipple Mulligan, David E Kim, David Baker, and Frank DiMaio (2016) "Simultaneous optimization of biomolecular energy function on features from small molecules and macromolecules", JCTC.
The protocol for ∆∆G calculations of membrane proteins has not been published: it uses the frankling2019 scorefunction and follows the ∆∆G protocol of Park et al. except for performing the calculations in atom-tree space (compared to cartesian space in the soluble protein pipeline).


## Requirements 

The following python3 packages are required to run the pipeline:
    - pandas
    
    - numpy
    
    - biopython (>= 1.80)
    
    - scipy
    

Required software:
    - Rosetta
    
    - PyRosetta (via conda install)
    
    - Muscle (for alignment)
    

## Installation

To install the pipeline, get it from the GitHub page.

An installation file is not yet available.


The following links can be included in your bashrc, otherwise the default (found in rosetta_path.py) will be used:
```bash
export Rosetta_main_path= ‘{Newest Rosetta version}’
export Rosetta_tools_path='{path to Rosetta tools}’
export Rosetta_database_path='{path to Rosetta database}’
export Rosetta_extension='linuxgccrelease'
export ddG_pipeline='{path to this pipeline}’
export muscle_exec='{path to muscle}’
export prism_parser='{path to prism parser}'
alias run_ddG_pipeline=’{path to run_pipeline.py}’
```


## Usage

The pipeline is invoked using:
```bash
run_ddG_pipeline -s {structure} (and any additional flags)
```

Run modes:
```bash
Run modes directs the actions of the pipeline
    print: prints default flag files 
    create: Creates all run files
    proceed: Restarts calculations with created run files (incl. relax and ddG calculation) - does not rerun already calculated files
    relax: Starts relax calculations with created run files 
    ddg_calculation: Starts ddg_calculation calculations with created run files
    fullrun: runs full pipeline                              
'Default value: create'
```

For most cases create or fullrun should be used


General flags
```bash
    Flags:
    -s path to pdb file
    -o path to output directory
    -i run modes (create, proceed, fullrun, relax, ddg_calculation)
    -mm mutation mode: do saturation mutagenesis [all] or use input mutfile 
    -m path to mutation input file: can be a rosetta_mutfile, mutfile_dir or similar (generated by prism2mutfile.py in ../scripts)
    --chainid which chain to run (default A)
    --run_struc which additional chains to keep in the structure to run (But not to calculate ddGs on)
    --ligand True/False whether to keep ligand 
    --overwrite_path True/False overwrites files and folders in output directory. needed for proceed mode
    --slurm_partition
    --verbose increase verbose level
    --gapped_output output pism and pdb file with shifted residue numbering according to input
    --dump_pdb dumps all mutant pdbs
    -nzip skip folder zipping (default off=false) 
    --do_checks does concistency checks after prepare and relax (default true)
```

Flags for membrane proteins:
```bash
    Flags:
    --mp needs to be set to true if running membrane protein pipeline
    --mp_span path to span file - if not present, choose calculation method in mp_calc_span_mode
    --mp_calc_span_mode span file calculation method, prefered DSSP
    --mp_prep_align_mode transfer protein into membrane plane, prefered OPM
    --mp_align_ref reference PDBid and chain for alignment, e.g. 3sn6_R
    --superpose_onTM Set to false if you want to align on the complete structure
```


Flags for modifying the protocol/pipeline (mostly development, partly not visible with the --help option)
```bash
    Flags:
    --ddgflags path to ddgflg file
    --relaxflags path to relaxflag file
    --mp_relax_xml path to relaxxml file for membrane protein pipeline
    --uniprot not implemented
    --scale scaling of ∆∆G to kcal/mol (default for soluble pipeline: 2.9, for membrane pipeline 1.0)

    --mp_thickness
    --mp_lipids
    --mp_temperature
    --mp_pH
    --benchmark_mp_repack
    --benchmark_mp_repeat
    --benchmark_mp_relax_repeat
    --benchmark_mp_relax_strucs
    --mp_ignore_relax_mp_flags
    --mp_energy_func
    --mp_energy_func_weights
    --mp_repack_protocol
    --mp_multistruc_protocol
    --mp_cart_ddg
```


### Recommendations & caveats
#### missing atoms
If your input structure contains missing non-heavy atoms, those will (likely) be remodeled during relax. It might happen that clashes due to rebuilding are not resolved during the minimization (although not expected). We advice everyone to compare their input and output structure for consistency.


#### missing residues
Missing residues are ignored and open loops are also not closed.


#### deviating values and consitency checks
Values that differ from normal runs, like a large fraction of high-scoring ddGs are not automatically detected and should be kept in mind for the user. 

If a relaxed structure has Eres for a residue >0 REU, all varianats of that base residue should be interpreted with care. You can see those values in your output folder "prism_rosettapdb_....txt", including the contacting residues, or calculate those values with the following function: ../software/scripts/pdb_to_prism - rosetta_energy_to_prism function with the input parameters: relaxed_pdb_file (output from the pipeline), temp_dir (for calculations and information for the prism parser: pdbID, pdbchain, uniprot_id; and outputs: pdb_prism_file
It extracts the energies from the final output pdb of the relaxation (summed up as comments at the bottom of the file).


#### (automatic) download of PDBs and general recommendations
An automatic download of pdb-ids is not possible and also not recommended. We highly recommend to pre-process first the pdb before handing it to the pipeline (e.g. with [PDB-redo](https://pdb-redo.eu/)) to reduce errors.


#### web services to align membrane proteins into the membrane plane
If no OPM file is available, you can use http://sunshine.phar.umich.edu/server.php to put the structure into the membrane plane.


#### new default for OPM: deepTMHMM
the new default for OPM is deepTMHMM. If you experience problems with the generation, consider updating you library:
```bash
pip3 install -U pybiolib
```


### Usage examples
#### Case 1 - Creating files for inspection
To run the pipeline without queing the jobs use the flag -i create

```bash
run_ddG_pipeline -s 1PGA.pdb -o run -i create --chainid A
```

To run from the same folder again, use --overwrite_path True 

```bash
run_ddG_pipeline -s 1PGA.pdb -o run -i fullrun --chainid A --overwrite_path True
```

#### Case 2 - Run on a single chain
To run saturation on a specific chain run:
```bash
run_ddG_pipeline -s 1PGA.pdb -o run -i fullrun --chainid A
```
This will create a folder "Run" relative to your current directory and run saturation mutagenesis on chain A using the structure 1PGA.pdb


#### Case 3 - Running specific variants
To run specific variants the variants need to specified in a mutation_input.txt

The format for the mutation_input.txt is Wildtype RosettaPositionNumber Variants:
```bash
G 10 DEA
H 11 TW
A 12 ACDEFGHIKLMNPQRSTVWY
```

Be aware that we are talking Rosetta numbering! This means numbering starts at 1 and there are no gaps

When doing multiple mutations, remember to follow the same rules for the mutation file. For example:
```bash
G 10 D H 11 TW
```
will do two sets of mutations, G10D H11T, and G10D H11W.

You can now do the run:
```bash
run_ddG_pipeline -s 1PGA.pdb -o run -i fullrun --chainid A -m mutation_input.txt
```

Alternatively, mutfile following the Rosetta scheme can be used. Also, prism files can be transfered into mutfiles following the ../script/prism2mutfile.py script. This script takes also a pdb file and renumbers it to rosetta numbering automatically.

#### Case 4 - Running chain in context of additional structure
To run for example chain A, while keeping chain B in structure the following flag can be used. To be safe also use the chainid flag and make sure run_struc contain all chains.

```bash
run_ddG_pipeline -s 1PGA.pdb -o run -i fullrun --chainid A --run_struc AB
```

#### Case 5 - Running a membrane protein
To run a protein through the membrane protein pipeline, -mp must be specified and a prepared protein provided. If the protein is not yet aligned, add --mp_align_ref which switches --mp_prep_align_mode to OPM. If no span file is provided, specify --mp_calc_span_mode with DSSP to calculate it:

```bash
run_ddG_pipeline -s 6xro.pdb -o run -i fullrun --chainid A -mp 1 --mp_calc_span_mode DSSP --mp_align_ref 6xro_A 
```

#### Case 6 - Running with a different score function
To run a the pipeline with a score function other than beta_nov16, one needs to copy cartesian_ddg_flagfile and relax_flagfile from PRISM/software/rosetta_ddG_pipeline/data/sp and modify them correspondingly. The flags of interest are:
```bash
-beta
-score:weights beta_nov16_cart
```
For anything other than beta_nov16, remove -beta flag and change the -score:weights flag. For example, cartesian_ddg_flagfile for ref2015:

```bash
-fa_max_dis 9
-relax:constrain_relax_to_start_coords
-ignore_unrecognized_res
-missing_density_to_jump
-nstruct 1
-relax:coord_constrain_sidechains 
-relax:cartesian
-score:weights ref2015_cart
-ex1
-ex2
-relax:min_type lbfgs_armijo_nonmonotone
-out:suffix _bn15_calibrated
-flip_HNQ
-no_optH false
-fa_max_dis 9.0
```
Pipeline flag usage:
```bash
run_ddG_pipeline -s 1u72.pdb -o run -i fullrun --chainid A --ddgflags cartesian_ddg_flagfile_ref2015 --relaxflags relax_flagfile_ref2015
```

## Support
For general support:
    Anders Frederiksen - anders.frederiksen@bio.ku.dk
    
For support about membrane protein runs:
    Johanna Tiemann - johanna.tiemann@gmail.com

## Roadmap
TBD

## Contributing
Contributing to the project is not currently possible, but we are very open to suggestions

## Acknowledgements 

TBD


## License
TBD
